---
layout: page
title: Cryptopals Set-2 Challenge-1
---

### Implement PKCS#7 padding

A block cipher transforms a fixed-sized block (usually 8 or 16 bytes) of plaintext into ciphertext. But we almost never want to transform a single block; we encrypt irregularly-sized messages.

One way we account for irregularly-sized messages is by padding, creating a plaintext that is an even multiple of the blocksize. The most popular padding scheme is called PKCS#7.

So: pad any block to a specific block length, by appending the number of bytes of padding to the end of the block. For instance,  
`"YELLOW SUBMARINE"`

padded to 20 bytes would be:

`"YELLOW SUBMARINE\x04\x04\x04\x04"`

## Solution

- In this challenge, we are expected to write a function that will pad any block to a specific given `padding length` using pkcs#7 padding scheme.
- In the PKCS#7 padding scheme, the value of the byte used for the padding will be the number of bytes the message needs to reach the padding length.
- Then the pad_num is calculated as the number of bytes require to reach padding length.
- Thus the total padding becomes `pad_num*bytes([pad_num])` and this padding is added.

```
The function pad(b"ABCDEFGH",5)
will result in b"ABCDEFGH\x02\x02"
```

- Also, lets also create an unpad function so that we can use it later. The unpad function will be simpler as we can get the pad byte from the last byte of the message and then just omit those many bytes from the end to get the original message back.

```
The function unpad(b"ABCDEFGH\x02\x02",5)
will result in b"ABCDEFGH"
```

## Code  

```python
def pkcs7_pad(data,pad_len):
    pad_num = pad_len - len(data)%pad_len
    data += bytes([pad_num])*pad_num
    return data

def pkcs7_unpad(data,pad_len):
    pad_num = int(data[-1])
    return data[:-pad_num]

message = b"YELLOW SUBMARINE"
pad_len = 20
padded_message = pkcs7_pad(message,pad_len)
assert padded_message == b"YELLOW SUBMARINE\x04\x04\x04\x04"
print(padded_message)
print(pkcs7_unpad(padded_message,20))
```  
